I learned from your swipes on Instagram.
Your brain does what you tell it to do.
You're the boss. Tell it. AI is going to
be a billion times smarter than humans.
I would take data points and
measurements and on topics like
happiness. Gratitude is the ultimate
solution to the happiness equation.
Mo Gaad, he is an expert on the topic of
happiness. If everyone in the world
listened to this podcast episode, the
world would be a drastically better
place.
And I was chief business officer of
Google X. Through that network, I've
connected with the wisest people on the
planet. We have an app coming out in
Christmas that is aiming to get to the
point where we know exactly why you're
unhappy. Literally the simplest surgical
operation not known to humankind. But
five mistakes happened and 4 hours later
Ali was gone. There's nothing I can do
to bring him back. But I can make his
essence alive. My intention shifted from
spending the rest of my life in grief to
actually writing what he taught me so
that I can share it with the world
[Music]
mogat.
You know, I've done this podcast for the
last 12 months every week, and there's
one name which my guests, the people
that sit in front of me, the successful
athletes, entrepreneurs, business people
from all walks of life, and just
generally ambitious successful people
kept saying, and it was Mo's name. You
know, I hype up these episodes a lot,
but I've never said this. This was my
favorite podcast of all time because of
the lasting value that I know it will
have on my life. I think I cried twice
in this podcast episode. Who is Moan?
He's a genius business person. So smart,
in fact, that Google made him the head
of Google X, which was their special
projects division where they do the most
crazy, insane things from flying cars to
machine learning. anything a genius
would be capable of doing. He's also a
remarkable entrepreneur. But the thing
that will bring the most value to you in
this episode if you listen to it will be
what he says about happiness. And some
of the things he says today have just
created these like personal revelations
in my head where I genuinely feel that I
have to go go and sit down in a room
alone and think about them for the next
couple of weeks. Genuinely
life-changing. And you've never heard me
this enthusiastic on the podcast. So, if
you're ever going to trust me with an
episode, trust me on this one. Are you
ready? I hope you are. Without further
ado, I'm Steven Bartlett and this is the
Diver CEO. I hope nobody's listening,
but if you are, then please keep this to
yourself.
[Music]
No, I guess my first question for you is
um because you know when I look at the
the things that you write about, the
topics um you speak about so often, the
businesses you've built, the areas of
interests you have, and I see that
they're so diverse and also they're very
smart, shall I say?
Oh, thank you. My my question is what
what were those um early personal but
also early professional experiences that
have shaped the way you see and analyze
the world?
What is that context that we need to
know about you? Uh
I I I think the thing that maybe shapes
me most is that I was born in the east,
raised in the east with the culture of
the east and educated in the west and
worked in the west with the culture of
the west. And um in a very unusual way,
I didn't judge either. I think there is
so much uh value to learn in each of
them, but they're almost exact opposites
and and to be able to embrace both of
them maybe has allowed me to translate
concepts that are normally spoken about
on one more than the other uh to the
other. So, so most of my work really is
uh uh highly dependent on my early uh
math, you know, love of mathematics,
love of physics. I'm I'm a very serious
geek. I don't say that in public because
it affects my uh I just said it. It
affects my CEO job, but I'm really geeky
like to to the point that I was writing
code until a few years ago. But I take
all of that language of very being very
organized, very systemic almost, you
know, engineered in everything. And I
try to explain concepts like
spirituality, like love, like humanity,
humanity's position in the modern age,
and so on and so forth. and I and I
explain them in slightly unusual ways.
You know, I use for example quantum
physics and theory of relativity to try
and explain death. Um I use mathematics
and theory of probability to to to
discuss the question of the presence of
a a divine being and so on and so forth.
And I think the thing is I have a brain
defect somewhere that basically does not
stop me from addressing crazy ideas. So
I I I normally am writing six books at
the same time and and and I love it. I
love it. I don't write for for you
sadly. I I I hate to say this. I write
for me. So I get inspired by a topic and
then I build a structure literally like
we write sub routines in software. I
write the entire you know um um
flowchart if you want of the book and
then leave it on my desktop and then
start to work on it. sometimes for a
year, sometimes for two years and and
eventually something comes out that
informs me and enriches me and at the
same time, you know, interests people.
You write for you.
Oh, absolutely.
So, why did you write a book about
happiness?
That's the most selfish thing I've ever
done in my life. I mean, if if you know
uh my story was um so I I I was very
successful at a very young age. So
unusual. I mean I'm born and raised in
Egypt, educated in public school, public
university in Egypt. So my biggest dream
was I was going to become sales manager
in IBM Egypt. That was my biggest dream.
And look at what happened. I mean I I
went through beyond my wildest
expectations. Chief business officer of
Google X is literally the second best
job on the planet. Okay. and and and you
know I I uh I had all of this you know
that people dream of at a very young age
at 29. I had uh you know the big villa
with the swimming pool uh with with you
know all of the money, all of the suits,
all of the luxury cars. uh from 25 when
I had nothing to 29 when I had
everything. I had the most wonderful
woman in my life, beautiful, wise,
sensitive, loving, who gave me two
wonderful kids and I was clinically
depressed and and and it's not an
unusual story where where we keep
chasing all of those things. I mean, my
my luck was that I hit my middle age
crisis at 29 when I achieved everything
they told me I was supposed to achieve
and couldn't find happiness. And so I
ended up in a place where I started to
research the topic uh just like I would
anything else. And I couldn't get a
word. I I just couldn't get it. You
know, they told me to meditate. My
engineering mind was like, "Tell me why.
Explain something to me. tell me why it
works, right? Uh, you know, if if they
told me to say, I would get really
angry. I still don't say, right? But but
the idea is uh is my brain wouldn't get
it. And instead of me rejecting that, I
started to look at those topics as an
engineer. So I would start to do
literally you know like the scientific
method. I would I would take data points
and and measurements and try to do
fitting lines and curves and charts on
topics like happiness and you know it
started to work for me. So four years in
I started to really become a little
better and I would go back to my
wonderful son Ali uh who was born a tiny
little Zen monk. He he knew those things
instinctively and even as a young child
you know age 8 I think was when I
started to discuss those things with
him. He would listen there and ask me a
couple of questions clearly to entertain
me and then basically say well done papa
this is amazing you could have just
asked me okay and then he would
literally explain it to me from the
heart. So how the heart feels it I I
would get how the left brain sees it and
he would get how the heart feels it.
your son at eight.
He was so wise, Stephen. He was so wise.
Ali, when he was 16, uh I promise you,
my friends will tell you, I would
actually I I publicly announced when I
grow older, I want to be like Ali. He
was a very unusual being. And and he uh
he he spoke very little, very very very
little. He was either laughing all the
time and being silly and goofy or when
you asked him a a serious question, he
would stay silent and then speak eight
words. Okay. And those eight words would
literally reshape your world. Okay. And
I noticed that at a very young age uh
for him. And so I started to consult
with him on a lot of topics. Uh on a lot
of topics and on happiness specifically
together we ended up with a model that
worked uh you know we had the happiness
equation. me at the happiness model. And
it worked. And it worked so well that
when we lost him, sadly uh when he was
21, my intention shifted from spending
the rest of my life in grief to actually
writing what he taught me so that I can
share it with the world. And that
basically determined the next life for
me after the life of the executive and
the chief business officer and the you
know stock options and the luxury and
the cars. that second life really was
the result of his departure.
And during during that period, the the
inspiration that inspired you to write
the book at the very beginning and go on
that journey to really find the answer
to happiness, you said you were
clinically depressed.
Yes.
Now, for people that don't know what
that means practically,
can you give a description?
Nothing would make me happy. And you can
you can literally uh you know as so I I
interviewed Ruby Wax on my uh on my
podcast on slow-mo and Ruby was known
for her sometimes you know depression
and sometimes teaching and she would
describe it as they cut your head off
and fill you with concrete when you're
depressed. You're unable to do anything.
You're unable to enjoy anything. You're
unable to engage. Right? And it comes in
in different layers. But but for me the
the challenge was I was so successful. I
was so successful. I literally could
print money on demand. I mean there were
times when my my my wife would say, "Can
we change the car?" And I would say, "So
what would you like?" And she would say
this. And I would say, "Okay, wait until
Wednesday." And I would be on the stock
market uh you know, trading for a few
days and making money, right? It was it
was so crazy because of my math skills
before the age of machine trading was
really as as entrenched as as it is
today. I could make money on demand and
yet I poured that money on my life and I
couldn't find happiness. Okay. I you
know and and that really shakes you
because now you can get the vacations
they're talking about. You can wear what
they're they told you is going to make
you happy. you can buy the things that
they told you are is going to make you
happy but nothing's making you happy and
then it started to reflect on my family
and I remember vividly the turning point
was a Saturday morning when you know my
my daughter Ali my son was that little
then monk uh my daughter is life her
life itself she truly is pure joy okay
and she was uh you know it was a
Saturday morning she's jumping up and
down in joy saying ah mommy said we're
going to go there can we stop and get
you know ice cream on the way. Can we do
that? And she's so happy. And I was
doing whatever busy people do, reading
an email or whatever crap. And and
basically I looked at her slowly raising
my head in grumpiness and said, "Can we
please be serious for a minute?" Okay.
What's serious? She was five. And I
could see with my own eyes as my
daughter's beautiful daughter's heart
broke. Okay. And I think to me that was
basically the moment where I said, "I
can't live with this person anymore. I
can't live with me." And when when you
see that, you make that choice. And
sadly, most people who are successful
like your audiences, actually wait until
that moment happens. When when they're
old, when they've gone to the point
where the good days have passed, the
days where you could have actually built
that connection with your family or or
with, you know, enjoyed your life a
little more are behind you. And then
they wake up. I was so lucky that I woke
up when I was 29.
And so you have this idea as you say
there to to write this book and to
answer this question that is becomes so
relevant and important to answer in your
life and as you're on that journey and
and consulting with with Alli Ali
passes.
Yes. No. So Ali Ali left after he
trained me well enough. So uh
uh it's really interesting. I mean he he
um so I I started my research maybe when
he was six or yeah he was 67 uh and
finished when he was 18 19 and you
couldn't dent my happiness then I was I
was the example of happiness I mean I'm
a Middle Eastern and at the time I used
to work at Microsoft at least through
that journey I used to work at Microsoft
and Microsoft's office was in Seattle so
I would fly every month for a week to
Seattle uh from Dubai to JFK and then
from JFK to to Washington. And every
time I landed in JFK, I got that random
security check where they give me a red
envelope and take me to Homeland
Security was really not the kindest of
treatment if you want with a stupid
smile on my face. Like I flew 12 hours,
then I sto stood in line for an hour and
a bit and then they gave me that
envelope and there is a guard walking
next to me now assuming I'm a criminal
until proven otherwise and they sit me
in that room and I have that stupid
smile on my face. Nothing could dent my
happiness. Okay, I have beautiful
thoughts inside me. have compassion for
every one of those officers, you know,
that they're just doing their job and of
course they're worried about their
country and it's really weird. And to
the point that I did this 37 times in a
row, okay? And to the point that I would
walk into the Homeland Security office
and the officers behind the counter
would go like, "Mr. Gates is back."
Okay? They know I'm the guy from
Microsoft. I've been there last month. I
would walk to the counter and they say,
"Answer the same 10 questions you we
asked you last time." So I would say,
"This is my name. this is my mother's
name this right and go through them one
by one without a dent in my happiness
but then life tests you so so uh and and
by the way I mean we can talk about this
but of course I you can feel unhappy but
I found a way to always come back to
happiness if you want um and then life
tests you and I think a life nudges you
it it seems that soul for happy needed
to be written okay and I had the notes
for it in 2011 but Hey, chief business
officer of Google X. Busy, busy, busy,
busy. And I kept delaying it and
delaying it and delaying it until Ali
basically came to visit us in uh in
Dubai
2014 and he was um diagnosed with a very
simple um appendix inflammation.
And yeah, you know, it's literally the
simplest surgical operation not known to
humankind. It's literally a four, five
minute thing. But five mistakes
happened. Five in a row. Everyone is pre
every one of them was preventable. Every
one of them was fixable. But five in a
row fixed wrong. And 4 hours later, Ali
was gone.
Yeah. I mean, it's easy to understand
how it feels even today, 7 years later,
losing a child is is just the hardest
thing ever. Uh at least for me, it's the
hardest thing ever. If life had taken
all my money and all what I've achieved
and you know made me homeless, it would
have probably felt less painful than
losing him. But but uh but our reaction
was very very unusual. Instead of trying
to you know fight with life uh I simply
said okay you know he's gone there's
nothing I can do to bring him back but I
can make his essence alive. I can keep
his essence in this world and his
essence to me was what he taught me. He
saved my life with what he taught me
about happiness. And so I sat down to
write first time that I really write in
English as English is not my first
language. I wrote for 4 and a half
months straight. And you know if if
you've read the alchemist by po you know
when you when you know your life's
purpose the universe conspires to make
it happen. I just can't tell you what
happened since then. I mean every part
of the universe is just pushing for this
mission to to work you know from finding
my agent at a time where he was actually
not feeling great about his life. So he
kept saying, "Can you send me another
chapter? Can you send me another
chapter?" Until I sent the whole book
saying, "What's he going to do with
this?" And then literally we meet and he
basically says, "Can I please represent
you?" We go out meet 17 publishers
within a week in the in in New York in
the in the capital of publishing and
then things roll and roll and roll to
the point that I came here in the UK uh
literally a week after the the
publication of Salt for Happy and I had
that interview very famous with Channel
4 News which within 3 days was the
highest watched news clip on the history
of channel channel 4 to the point that
the CEO is starting to wonder like I've
been pro broadcasting violence and war
for the you know last I don't know how
many years and my highest watched clip
at the time it was 37 million views is
about happiness okay which obviously is
understandable it is the pandemic of our
time within 3 days after that we were
watched 87 million times okay more than
double the highest uh and and the mo the
movement was starting the 1 billion
happy movement was starting basically I
think it was a very strong uh uh
confirmation to the world that this is
something the world needs and you can
actually feel today that there is a
shift not because of me only but there
are so many people coming into this uh
there is a big shift now between
employee satisfaction and employee
happiness between you know let's just
work on mental health and actually let's
work on happiness and so on and so
forth. There seem it seems that the
world is getting it that that you know
we're not supposed to be grinding
ourself uh and giving away our lives uh
for things that we think are going to
make us happy. We might as well be happy
and get everything as a result because
we can then be successful, we can be
engaged, we can be lovable, we can be,
you know, supported and so on and so
forth.
It's just remarkable in my mind that you
can lose the most important thing to you
as you've described it in your life,
your son, to human error and still not
fall into
resentment or bitterness or what would
it do?
Regret. What would it do? I mean, of
course, I I mean, I took steps to make
sure that things are corrected so that
no one else gets hurt, right? Uh but
what would it I mean I was very
prominent at the time when Ali died. Uh
I was chief business officer of Google X
but I was still between Dubai and
California. So I spent half of my time
in Dubai and I it was after seven years
of being vice president of emerging
markets for Google. So I had opened half
of Google's offices globally. I was very
you know well connected to the business
leaders and government leaders in Dubai.
And so when Ali died uh we got a call
from the top of the ministry of health
saying we heard what happened. I'm so
sorry, Mo. Uh, would you mind if we
perform an autopsy on Ali's body to get
to the top to the bottom of this? So, I
looked at his mother sitting next to me,
most wonderful woman on the planet with
her eyes teary. And I said, Neibbel,
would you mind if they do that? And she
raised his head and said, "Would it
bring Ali back?" And that one sentence
anchored us in the truth. Okay. You see,
the problem with grief is that the cycle
of grief takes you five steps. Huh? The
the very last step is acceptance. Okay?
And that step of acceptance could take
you 70 years sometimes.
For us,
the truth was glaringly obvious 4 hours
later. There's nothing you can do to
bring him back. This is it. And and the
finality of death is so corrective of
all of our human illusions. Huh? This is
it. He's not coming back. So, what can
you do now? And my brain started to
attack me. my brain started to say, "You
should have, you know, the one thought
for the first uh few days was, you
should have driven him to another
hospital. You should have driven him."
Until I said to my to my to my brain
like, "Okay, I I wish I could go back
and drive him to another hospital. I
can't. So, can you please bring me a
thought I can act upon?" Okay. And so, I
had a couple of days of silence. And
then
then my wonderful daughter comes to me.
They were very very close. And she said,
"Papa Ali
uh had a dream a couple of weeks ago and
he called and told me about it." Uh and
I think it's very relevant. You need to
know. Okay. And I said, "What baby?" And
he said, and she said he dreamt he was
everywhere and part of everyone.
And that he it felt so amazing that he
didn't want to be back in his body.
And when she told me, I still tear up
thinking about it today. When she told
me this, my blurry brain
could only listen to this is my master
giving me my target. That's the only
thing I heard. It's like make me
everywhere and part of everyone. That's
what I heard. And at the time I was head
of Google. I I understood billions. I
knew how to get the message to billions
of people. So what did I do? I literally
said out loud, "Consider it done. It's
done." Okay? And I told you when I wrote
Soul for Happy, it was the most selfish
thing you can ever do. I wanted the
essence of my son to to to live on. And
so I basically wrote it with the
intention of okay, I'm going to make him
everywhere and part of everyone. I'm
just going to spread this beautiful
essence to 10 million people. And then I
don't know 70 years later through six
degrees of separation, a tiny bit of him
will be everywhere and part of everyone.
That was my blurry brain. But maybe it
was also life's way of saying share
something do something useful enough
enough building phones and building you
know faster engines and you know maybe
the world needs something different
maybe maybe share something that
actually is needed by humanity.
Is that where that 10 billion million
number came from?
10 million was the original target.
Yeah, 10 million happy was. And at the
time it felt crazy that we were shooting
for 10 million. But again with things
like channel 4 alone, I think by week 8
we had reached 137 million people.
Crazy.
Okay. But we don't measure those by the
way. We don't measure just the views. We
we measure how many people took action
uh in terms of uh of receiving the
message. So it's it's basically 1
billion happy today is three steps. Step
one is we're going to give you send you
a message that wakes you up that tells
you happiness is your birthright and
it's highly attainable. It follows an
equation. Okay? So you can actually uh
do certain things and you will be
happier. Right? The second once you you
get that message that's not enough. We
we count you as one of billion happy if
you take one of two actions afterwards.
Either you invest in your own happy
happiness, right? So you invest in your
own happiness by going to another piece
of content, shifting to, you know, read
a book or watch another video. We can
see that you're investing in your
happiness, asking me a question, getting
in touch, whatever that is. Or you share
happiness forward. Okay? And the entire
Ponzi scheme if you want of 1 billion
happies built on the idea of we hope
that as a small team uh within hopefully
the next 10 12 years uh we will have you
know cultivated a million champions that
will make a billion people happy as
their own mission and then we will get
completely forgotten. Okay. because it's
the only way for it to succeed is that
it's not counting on you know one person
or one face or one team because the team
will get dismantled and I'm you know
going to disappear and it has to be a
movement right and so the whole movement
is on that pillar number three pillar
number three is you got a message of
happiness you you know it might have
touched you can you share it to two
people and ask them to share it to two
people simple exponential curve simple
Ponzi scheme really a positive Ponzi
scheme. Okay. And it's been working. We
we think we're at 51 million, which is
not the biggest number, but you know,
you understand the the the law of
accelerating returns, right? So, if it's
now, you know, if we can do this again
in four years and then that becomes 100
million and then the 100 becomes 200 and
so on, you know, who knows? Who knows?
We may get there.
And the and the mission is I guess the
banner of the mission is soul for happy,
right? Is that
No, no, no, no. So, no, actually not at
all. So books don't go to millions.
That's the truth of books. Okay. The
books allow me the opportunity to sit
with you and and spread this to your
audience. Okay. Uh but but the mission
is much bigger now. So the pillars of
the mission are there is a tremendous
amount of content uh that I put out
there. I mean if you search for my name
on Google, you'll have hundreds of hours
of videos. I'm tireless.
I did. Yeah.
I watched several hours.
Yeah. and and and some of them are you
know Stanford University classrooms and
some some of them are short
conversations with you know insightful
people like yourself and it's it's you
know it's there is hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of content of hours of
content but that's one side the other
side of course is uh through that
network I've of course connected with
the mo with the wisest people on the
planet uh so you know when I was chief
business officer of Google I would be
connected to prime ministers and
business owner or owners. Now I'm
connected to his holiness, the the Dalai
Lama, the top monks in the world, the
top teachers in the world. And so I
brought all of them together on my on my
podcast on slow-mo. And slow-mo is a
very unusual because it comes from a
chief business officer, right? Basically
a simple message to say take a little
bit of time to slow down and reflect.
Okay? And it's not me talking. It's the
wisest people on the planet. Like I get
blown away every time. Okay? And and and
so that's that's another element. The
other element of course is training
material. So we're working on that. We
have an app coming out in Christmas that
is actually really promising. So we
we're building an artificial
intelligence based happiness assistant
which covers a very interesting gap that
we're all unhappy but we're not all
unhappy for the same reasons. And so if
I dis dispatch content at you that is
irrelevant, okay, I'm probably going to
piss you off rather than make you happy.
So the app in version one it's not
perfect yet but in version two we're
aiming to to get to the point where we
know exactly why you're unhappy and so
we're able to actually show you the
enough learning and enough practice that
can allow you to find the path back to
happiness. So it's more intelligent if
you want not in in understanding
happiness but in understanding
unhappiness if you want.
So to understand what happiness is you
have to understand the cause of it. Yes.
And you write about that extensively in
solve for happy. So what is the cause of
unhappiness as you see it? Especially if
you're building sort of machine learning
applications that are going to you know
um solve you know make people arrive at
contentment or happiness in a
personalized way. We must be able to
know what's causing this lack of
allow me a bit of time to explain it
because it it's simple when we get it
but it's not simple to get to it. So so
happiness is very predictable. Okay. If
you look back at any point in your life
where you ever felt happy, there is one
commonality across all of those moments
that can actually do be documented in a
mathematical equation. Okay? You've
never felt happy because of a specific
event in your life. Okay? Uh take for
example rain. Rain doesn't make you
happy or unhappy. There is no inherent
value of happiness in rain. Okay? Rain
makes you happy when you want to water
your plants and it makes you unhappy
when you want to sunbathe. Right? And so
it's not just the event rain, it's the
comparison between the event and an
expectation in your mind of how life
should be. Okay? If you're worried about
your plants, then life should be
generous to me and get me rain so I can
water the plants. And if life does that,
then life meets your expectations and
you're happy. Okay? And so happiness in
that sense becomes equal to or greater
than. So it's really mathematics that
your perception of the events of your
life minus your expectations of how life
should be. Okay? And apply that to
anything. Apply that to anything. So you
know my favorite example is nature.
We're all happy in nature. Why are we
all happy in nature? I mean you go out
there and there are ants and there are
flies and you know trees are crooked and
there are you know shrubs everywhere and
bushes and it's just really not that
hedged and organized. But that's what we
expect. So, you know, nature's chaos is
what we expect nature to be. And so, we
feel happy. You know, nobody ever sits
in front of the ocean and says, "I like
the view, but please mute the sound."
Okay? You just take it. You know, it's
it's the monotonous sound and the view
and the wind and and the sun and the
whole experience. Right? uh and because
of that
uh happiness becomes very different than
what was defined to us. Okay. What was
defined to us is that happiness is found
in a gathering at the pub or a party or
a you know an activity or some kind of
pleasure or fun or elation or whatever
that is. That's not at all true. These I
I call these the state of escape. Okay.
Happiness as per the definition of the
happiness equation is events equal to or
beating expectations. Life going my way.
Okay? And so basically happiness is that
calm and peacefulness you feel when
you're okay with life as it is. It
doesn't really matter what life is.
Okay? What matters is that you can be
okay with it. Right? So so you take you
know the any example if your boss is
annoying and your expectation is yeah
bosses are annoying. this is what life
is about. They become bosses because
they're annoying, right? And and so if
if that's your expectation, you're going
to look at it and go like, "Yeah, I need
to learn the skill of managing annoying
bosses." Okay? And if that's the case,
then you're not going to be upset about
it. Uh similarly, anything else, if you
look at it, then it's not just the
event, it's your perception of the
event. So you have a something to
influence. It's not just the event. Huh?
Your partner might say something hurtful
on Friday at 4 p.m.
That's the event. My partner said
something hurtful at Sunday morning. You
tell yourself he or she doesn't love me
anymore. Okay, that's your perception of
the event. That's not actually the
event. The event is something hurtful
was said. But your perception of the
event is your work is your is your brain
adding color to it. And then you compare
that to your expectations, right? You
compared my boss is annoying to my boss
shouldn't be annoying. Where did you get
that from? Right? So, we blur the
happiness equation. We break the
happiness equation because of what I
call the six and seven. Okay? Six grand
illusions and seven blind spots which
are the six grand illusions are
basically
uh call them pathways
uh that the modern world teaches us to
navigate the modern world that are
illusions are not true. Okay. Um take
for example control. Everyone knows that
to succeed in the modern world you have
to learn to control certain events
right. So you start to believe that the
way to succeed in life is to control
everything. But the truth is even if you
go down to the basics of physics that we
never are in control that the the
absolute design of nature itself of the
universe itself is entropy and chaos.
Right? That's the actual design. And so
if you try to control it, you're bound
to be disappointed. A lot of events are
going to miss your expectations. Okay?
And yes, I'm not saying don't control
anything at all. But start to understand
that you're you're going to be selective
because you have a finite amount of
effort. And by the way, even if you're
selective and you you try to control
everything, sometimes things will fall
out of control. Okay? And that should be
your expectation. Once you get that
right, that was one that was my biggest
illusion. Okay? I am a mathematician. I
am a software developer. I am a
physicist. I am an engineer. And I am a
senior executive. It doesn't get worse
than that. Okay. I'm like the worst.
Absolutely the worst. I used to give my
wonderful wife, I swear to you, Stephen,
don't judge me. I used to give her a
spreadsheet that would tell her when to
wash the colors and when to wash the
whites based on our average consumption
as a family to save the environment. And
poor Nebel would would actually smile at
me and say, "Sure, baby. I will use
this." Right? Of course, and ignores the
hell out of me because that's how crazy
you can be when it comes to control.
Now, these are the illusions. If you
live your life through the illusion of
control, good luck finding happiness.
So, six grand illusions. The illusion of
uh of thought, the illusion, the
illusion of self, the illusion of uh
knowledge, the illusion of time,
control, and fear. Okay. Now, that's one
side. And that disrupts your your entire
view of what to expect from life because
you're expecting life to behave through
a lens of a lens of an illusion. The
other side of it is what I call seven
blind spots. Okay? And the seven blind
spots are not really defects in your
brain. As a matter of fact, they are the
very design of your brain. Okay? Your
brain is designed to tell you what's
wrong. Okay? It's not designed to, you
know, if a tiger shows up right here
now, my brain has no use whatsoever in
telling me, "Oh my god, look how
majestic that animal is." Right? Yeah,
it's a beautiful animal, but my brain
will say, "We're going to die." Okay?
And we're going to die is the idea that
basically makes our uh our brain
constantly look for what's wrong. Blur
the events of life. Huh? You ask a
mother and and she will say, "Oh, my
daughter's been sick all winter." No,
she just had two episodes of flu, three
days each. But to the to the caring
heart of a mother, that needs to be
exaggerated to the exaggeration is one
of the blind spots. Your your brain is
trying to get you to take action. So, it
pushes you. H it pushes you by
exaggerating the event a little bit so
that you jump in and take action. And
accordingly, the event you're comparing
to, you're comparing the wrong event to
the wrong expectation and the happiness
equation falls apart.
Under all of this, you're inferring
something which I think will annoy a lot
of people. And that is that happiness is
a choice.
Oh, totally.
And that you you you can choose to be
happy. Totally.
And that if you're unhappy and really
for many circumstances in our life
dayto-day in work and love and
relationships, personal responsibility
is the is the answer. and
entirely on you
and a lack thereof is the cause.
Absolutely. You know what you just did?
You've just lost us 80 8% of the
audience.
I know. Do you know why I know because I
did a tweet one day about this and what
my tweet was um there's like a I guess a
mental model but there's a reframing
that can I think has brought me
happiness which is when something
happens to me I I used to like many
people say x thing that happened has
pissed me off.
Yeah. And just by changing that sentence
to I've pissed myself off because of X
thing.
Absolutely.
And I tweeted that and I I was like try
it. Just like reframe it and take
personal responsibility for how you're
feeling. And in the comment section,
everyone was like
nope.
Yeah.
People don't like the idea that they
have control over their emotional
responses.
So when I when I wrote sort of when I
wrote when I write books in general, I
write them I write them like software.
So I issue a beta version. Okay. And I
get 270 people. I don't know why 27 is
fascinating.
Yeah. I get 270 people to read it on
Google Docs. So I give them editor uh
privileges. So they I can actually edit
the text, right? And then something
fascinating happens. They they edit the
text and then others edit what they
edited. Okay? And there is a
conversation happening and basically it
takes the book to its best possible
version. if you want uh in s for happy I
had uh a sentence on page 11 that
basically said exactly what you said
happiness is a choice okay and at that
page I lost 8% of the readers okay and
you know I looked into the information
that they gave me about themselves the
early readers and the eight most of the
8% that left were already in depression
okay and to tell someone uh it's your
responsibility to get yourself out of
this horrible place that you're in is
quite disturbing because we like the
idea of saying no no hold on no it's not
me life is treating me really badly
that's why I'm not happy okay I can't do
anything about it life took my son you
know life took my son I have the right
to be unhappy yes life took your son
that's true and you have the right to be
unhappy but you're never going to get
out of unhappiness if you wait for life
to bring him back or you wait for life
to correct its action okay the only way
you can come out of unhappiness is if
you choose and say, "Okay, it's going to
be a long journey. It's going to take a
lot of time, okay, and I'm going to try
and try and try, but I'll get there."
And and neuroplasticity proves that.
Neuroplasticity basically tells you that
if you just run a happiness kind of
activity once a day, every day, your
brain will be better at it. And and I
mean, please don't get me wrong, but
what do most of us do every day? We
watch negative news. We swipe on toxic
positivity and we we're just drowning
ourselves in negativity. And then what
happens? What happens is we become
really good at being negative. We become
really good at finding what's wrong with
life. Become very good at, you know,
getting pissed off with the prime
minister, right? Because it's an
activity we do on daily basis. So your
brain goes like this must be important
for her or him. Okay? I'm just going to
make sure I have the neurons aligned
around that. And so you're basically
we're basically configuring our brains
to be unhappy. I have not watched a
horror movie for 15 years.
Really?
Yeah. You know what that means? I have
not had a nightmare for for 15 years.
Not a single one. Okay. I have not
watched a violent movie unless really
badly recommended to me because it has a
a good message in it. And I watch
Michael McIntyre every every night
before I sleep. I love Michael McIntyre.
Who's going to get me to say hi to
Michael McIntyre?
The but but it's but but think about
that practice. Huh? My brain before I go
to sleep is laughing.
Is laughing. That's a choice. That's a
choice.
And and that is the kind of
neuroplasticity that we need to shift.
You know, if you if you go to the gym
and lift weights every day, you're going
to look like a triangle. If you squat
every day, you're going to look like a
pair. Okay? The same is happening inside
your brain. You just don't see it. If
you're constantly watching, you know,
news media, right,
you're literally building your muscles
that are concerned and are, you know,
uh, critical and are worried about the
world when in reality most of the time
you can't do anything about it. Like,
okay, so I'll give you a very strange
example. When I I was locked down, first
lockdown, I was in London. Second
lockdown I was in Canada. Okay. As the
lockdown was approaching, I I stopped
watching news after April 2020. Zero
news. Okay. And by the time I was in
Montreal, someone texted me and said,
"Hey, by the way, did you know we're
going to code red tomorrow?" I said,
"Yeah, what's code red?" She said, "All
restaurants are closed. You wear a mask
everywhere." I said, "Good. That's it.
That's all the news I needed to know."
Really? Okay. People would go like, "No,
how come you need to know the numbers
and the statistics and the death rate
and there?" No, I don't. Okay, someone
else is doing this. And by the way, if I
know it and I don't like it and I don't
believe in what they're doing, I'm going
to be locked down anyway. So, can I
waste my time or actually utilize my
time in building a podcast that becomes
one of the top half% of the of all
podcasts globally? Isn't that a better
use of my life than just watching the
news and crit, you know, creating that
illusion for myself that I can actually
influence anything when in reality? So,
you know, I I normally advise people and
say, look, if you've been following a
certain topic for the last two months
and have not been able to influence the
decision on that topic for the last two
months, you're useless. So, stop
watching that topic. Okay? And start
choosing topics that you can champion.
Okay? one or two because you're human.
You're not, you know, you're not
Superman. Find one or two real, you
know, purposes that you actually care
about and try to learn enough about
them, enough depth about them to
influence them. That's the way to make
the world better. That's the way to make
your life better. And yeah, climate
change is really something very
important, but it's not on my agenda. I
I don't work on climate change. I work
on happiness. That's my part of life.
Okay. someone else I trust will be
working on climate change which I
believe is as important if not more
important but it's not mine I don't need
to watch everything about it okay and
concern myself about it all the time I
need to be updated I need to do my part
by by really changing my habits as a
human but that's it that's as far as I
go
there's something in there which is
clearly a theme in I think three topics
we've touched on the passing of your son
you know you talked there about co um
and other elements which is this theme
of like radical acceptance.
Oh, absolutely.
Like instant radical acceptance.
Oh, absolutely. I mean, this is what I
call the Jedi master level of happiness.
So, there are three levels of happiness,
right? Uh the the the you know, if you
um if you really think about it, I call
it the happiness flowchart.
Events are going to piss you off. It's
just the truth. H if you can manage to
acknowledge your emotion and say, "Oh my
god, I feel am I angry? Is this anger? I
mean is this is this what I'm feeling?
And then and then you take that feeling
and you say to yourself, okay,
interesting. I am angry. I need to do
something about it. I will give you
three steps. Okay. The beginner's level
is ask yourself if what you're thinking
is true. Your partner said something
hurtful on Friday. Your thought is he or
she doesn't love me anymore. Okay? Ask
yourself if that thought is true. If it
isn't, drop it. There's no point to be
unhappy. If it is, then let's go to the
black belt level of unhappiness, which
is can I do thing something about it.
That's the second question. Is it true
is question one. Can I do something
about it is question two. Right? And
honestly, by the way, it doesn't take
more than 2 seconds to feel the emotion.
Ask yourself if it's true and then go to
to to uh to can I do something about it?
And if yes, then do it. What are you
waiting for? Text him or text her and
say, "Baby, can we please talk over
dinner what you said on Friday hurt me?"
Okay, instead of just banging your head
against the table hoping that they will
find out and come and say, "Oh, I'm so
sorry." You know, I I had I I was
teaching this this story really hurts
me. I I was teaching, you know, when
before lockdown, I I taught a lot of
people in workshops and seminars, more
than two 20,000 people. One one day, one
of them comes to me in the first break
and says, "What are you talking about?
What do you mean happiness is a choice?
You have no idea what happened to me."
Okay. And I said, "Okay." And she said,
"When I was 17." She was 74 at the time.
Can you believe that? H 57 years of
holding on to one thought, hitting her
head against the wall, right? And I
hugged her. I hugged her. I cried. And I
said, "Did it work? Did all of that
work? Or was the better thought, okay,
it was horrible, but can I do something
about it?" Okay. And that's question
number two. That's black belt.
Sometimes, however, there's nothing you
can do about it. Whatever she
experienced could be irreversible. What
I have experienced the loss of Ali is
irreversible. There's nothing you can do
about it. Okay? And I'm not asking
everyone to get there quickly. But the
Jedai master level of happiness is to
say, okay,
it happened and I have no choice to
change it. There is nothing I can do to
fix it. So can I accept it but not
surrender and lie down and you know and
and die. Accept it and then start to do
something to make my my life better
despite its presence or maybe because of
its presence. Okay. Can I accept that
Ali died and start to spread his message
so that my life and the life of others
become better? Can I accept that I'm
locked down and start my podcast so that
I can use the time where I'm not
traveling? Can I do that? I call that
committed acceptance. Okay? And it's
very simple. If you commit and accept to
if you accept things you you can't
change and commit to make your life
better despite of or because of their
presence,
nothing can beat you. Nothing can beat
you. And yeah, does it is it horrible
that I actually managed to move on and
and you know, not hit my head against
the wall for 27 years? Uh does that say
I don't love Ali? What are you talking
about? I I adore Ali. I cry about
missing him still today. Right? It's not
that it's there is nothing to prove in
that what what I can prove is I love him
so much that I actually dedicate my life
to spreading his message. That's so much
better than sitting there and saying,
"Ah, life hit me. I don't like life."
Right? That's a six-year-old attitude,
honestly. Okay?
adults will say, "Okay, and especially
business people, I mean your audiences,
huh, the market changes all the time."
Do you sit down and go like, "Ah, I lost
another deal." Or do you just get up and
say, "Why why did we do lose this deal?
What can we do about it?" Right? And if
if there is something wrong with the
product, can we change the product?
Right.
What you talked to there about business
in particular
rings very very true because in business
and you've been you know very successful
entrepreneur yourself and worked with
teams you'll get people who are high in
defaulting to logic in moments of chaos
and also default to personal
responsibility and those that don't.
Yeah.
And the outcomes of both groups are
quite pretty different. And actually
this this approach of is it true uh can
I do something about it? Can I accept it
and and and commit? I learned that in
business. Okay. So, I've spent mo most
of my my career I was managing managers.
And what do managers do? They open your
door and they sit down and complain.
Okay. And after a while, it becomes too
much. So, my attitude was very
straightforward. I would give them 10
minutes to vent. Then 10 minutes to ask
them, is this true? Okay. Is there
anything you're missing? Is is the legal
team also nice? Not just making your
life miserable, right? Have they have
you seen evidence that they've helped
you before? So, you know, is it true?
And then I go like, so now great, last
10 minutes of the meeting. What are we
going to do about it? Are we going to be
able to to to improve it, fix it, or are
we going to accept it and do something
despite its presence? And it's a very
simple business approach. Now, most of
us do that in business, but when it
comes to our personal life, we don't do
that. And interestingly,
most of us, by the way, who do that in
business are very successful in
business. And most of us who do that in
life are very successful in life. It's
not just happy. It makes us h makes us
successful because it doesn't waste our
cycles on things that are not necessary.
So if you can do it at work, do it at
home, do it in your life, do it in your
relationships. It's really a very
straightforward flowchart.
You talked about when you were talking
about the the chatter that arrived after
Alli's passing
and it it was telling you maybe you
should have driven him to another
hospital. maybe you should have done
this and you could have done this
differently. That is, you know,
everybody has that that chatter show up
in their minds at certain points which
seems to be, you know, not necessarily
your best friend and is sometimes
suggesting that you should do X, Y, and
Zed, which would probably be
destructive. What you said following
that is that
you almost like disassociated from it
and you and it was it wasn't it wasn't
you. You you're almost describing it as
if it was someone else in your head.
Absolutely. I call my brain Becky. Yeah.
You you call your brain Becky.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Talk to me. What?
So So
Becky is a third party. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Becky is not me.
Okay.
So So think about it. Huh? It doesn't
take a lot of logic. Again, it's one of
the illusions of the modern world. The
illusions of the modern world basically
we glorify thinking so much that we
think that the voice inside our heads
telling us what to do is us telling us
what to do. If it was you telling you
what to do, why would it need to talk?
And and I think really you need to think
about this. And there has been uh uh uh
you know research in this since the
1920s. And Liv Gdov uh Gdovski I think
his name is a Russian Nobel Prize winner
in the 1920s basically won the the Nobel
Prize because he observed that the voice
box uh when you're when you have that
internal dialogue in your head is moving
ever so slightly like like it does when
you speak out loud. Okay. And so MIT
proved that actually 2007 there was a a
wonderful MRI study where they put
participants in MRI machines, give them
word puzzles and the participant problem
solving areas of the brain would light
up for for as long as it takes to
actually solve the problem and then that
would shut down. So no no no more
problem solving but the participant
still not aware of the of the answer and
the pro and the and the speech
association area of the brain would
actually light up for up to 8 seconds
and then you would know the answer then
the participant would know the answer.
Okay so literally your brain solves the
problem and they then takes up to 8
seconds to to turn it into words to tell
it to you. Your brain is literally
talking to you. It's not I think
therefore I am. It's I am therefore my
brain thinks. Now the the interesting
challenge we have in the modern world is
this. Nobody wakes up in the morning and
tells themsself uh I pump blood around
my body therefore I am. Okay. The
biological function of your heart is to
pump blood around your body. Okay. Yet
we think I think therefore I am. I am
that voice in my head. Now you know
simply if you realize that this is just
a biological organ. Okay. And the
biological product of your brain is
thoughts. And the and and the currency
of the brain is words because the only
building blocks of knowledge you have
since you started to speak is words.
Okay? And so accordingly what your brain
is doing is it's analyzing its it's you
know it's the world around it and
presenting ideas so that you can choose.
Now if you think that those ideas are
you telling you what to do then you're
going to obey. Okay? If it says oh life
is miserable then it must be true. Life
must be miserable. But that's not the
truth at all. If me and Becky are two
different people, I can debate what
Becky Becky's telling me. I can refuse
to obey what Becky is telling me to do
and I can tell Becky to shut the f up.
Do you understand that? And I actually
do it very often. I'm like, I'm working
on something and Becky comes up with an
idea. Oh, my your daughter doesn't love
you anymore. I'm like, Becky, we're
going to talk about this at 6. It's as
simple as that, right? And your brain
does what you tell it to do. I mean,
anyone listening to us, if you tell your
brain, "Raise my right hand," your brain
is not going to raise your left foot.
It's just going to obey. Just tell it.
You're the boss. Okay? So, when your
brain poisons you with all of those
thoughts, follow the flowchart. Okay,
Becky, vent a little bit. Then tell me,
is this true? Is there something I can
do about it? Can we accept it and do
something despite its presence? How
difficult is that? And so most happiness
practitioners I interviewed my dear dear
friend Matthew Ricard on on slow-mo.
Matthew Ricard is known as the world's
the world's happiest man. So 63 hours
63,000 hours of lifetime meditation.
Okay. His brain circuitry is literally
different than ours. Okay. And and I
asked him and I said, "Matthew, so do
you sometimes get unhappy?" And he
laughed and in his funny French accent
said, "What are you talking about me?
I'm pissed off all the time." Okay. And
and basically all happiness experts will
tell you unhappiness is a survival
mechanism. It's alerting you. Your brain
is saying, "Hey, something is not
perfect. Can you please look into this?"
Right? The game is not to avoid that.
That's actually harmful for you. You
want you want to be aware of the things
that might go wrong. Okay? The game is
how quickly do you bounce back to
happiness?
From that moment where your brain says
something is not right, how quickly do I
go back to happiness? And I don't brag
about this, but I say to encourage
people. I'm, you know, if I'm allowed to
teach people about happiness, I need to
be the Olympic champion of the sport.
Okay? So, I promise you, and I'm not
bragging, on average, it takes me 7
seconds from the time my brain suggests
that something deserves my happiness to
the time I either dismiss it because
it's not true or decide what I'm going
to do about it or decide to accept it
and think what else I'm going to do is 7
seconds. 7 seconds. Okay. Yes. Sometimes
I get stuck in, you know, maybe three,
four times a year I get stuck in
something that takes me, you know, a day
to overcome. But most of the time, it's
a very simple flowchart. It's a very
logical process
and you've had to train yourself to get
to that point.
It's it's neuroplasticity.
It is new. Go to the gym. Okay. Write
the flowchart on a piece of paper and
every time your emotion changes, look at
it. Is it true? Can I do something about
it? Can I accept it and do something
despite its presence? It's really that
simple.
And you talk a lot about one of the
illusions you said there was time.
Oh, I love time.
And and the importance of um presence.
What role does does time in being
present because you also you talked
about that the world's happiest man as
you described him being a great
meditator and I think from what I
understand about meditation although I'm
not an expert much of that is about
bringing us to the present moment
totally I mean there are there are two
sides to time that we need to understand
one you can one you can easily
understand from theory of relativity and
and Einstein's view of spaceime anything
you know about time is not real as a
matter of fact nobody has a clue what
time is okay uh and and we have to
accept this that The illusion of time in
the modern world is because we've
managed to uh uh to to control what
we've measured. Okay, we're we're
measuring mechanical movements that sort
of hint to time to the passage of time
and we're we now can show up on time and
you know have an interview that we can
measure is like an hour and a bit and so
on and so forth. But time itself we
don't know. Okay. The the only
understanding we have of time is that we
are being propelled forward through
space time along the arrow of time.
Okay. And that every t every slice of
spaceime we're we're standing there in
that slice only living here and now.
Okay. You've never ever lived yesterday.
Do you realize that? When you lived
yesterday, it was called today. You're
never going to live tomorrow. When you
when you live tomorrow, it's going to be
called today. Okay? It's always right
here and right now. And I did a an
interesting analysis in solve for happy
where I listed down the majority of
human emo emotions and plotted them
across where they are anchored in time
and across if they're positive or
negative. Okay? So you take an emotion
like regret regret is anchored in the
past. It's about something that happened
in the past and it's negative. You take
something like anxiety. Anxiety is
anchored in the future. It's about
something that might happen in the
future and it's negative. Okay. The
majority of negative emotions are
anchored in the past and the future. The
majority of positive emotions are
anchored in the present moment. Okay? If
you're if you're here and now, there's
absolutely nothing wrong. I mean, think
about it this way. If you're listening
to us talk having this conversation as a
as one of our listeners, by definition,
there is no tiger trying to eat you. You
know the act the reality that you know
which is really shocking the the the
reality that you can feel unhappy about
something in the past and the future is
in itself evidence that now is okay
because if there was a tiger trying to
eat you right now you wouldn't be
thinking about losing your job in 3
weeks.
Okay.
So the truth is every time remind
yourself the the fact that I'm thinking
about past and future is it
self-evidence that now is fine. There is
a roof on top of my head. I'm obviously
not starving. Okay. You have an
electronic device that allows you to
listen to us. Uh, life is okay.
That's so crazy. I've never actually
thought about that idea of practically
of what you just said then of that the
person listening to this now focusing on
the sound of my voice is not actually
unhappy now.
Absolutely not.
They're not when they stop listening to
it, they might their thoughts might
descend into unhappiness, past, future
regret, whatever. But as they're
listening to this, they're not actually
in the state of unhappiness. They have
to stop listening and stop engaging to
and think about something else to create
space for that.
Remember Inception?
Yeah. The beginning of Inception, the
question was what is the most uh deadly
parasite or whatever? I don't remember.
And he said it's an idea. an idea. You
have never, there is nothing in your
life that has the power to make you
unhappy until you turn it into a
thought, a negative thought, and turn it
into your head and torture yourself with
it. Simple as that. Okay? If you're
locked down and you're at home and you
have food and you have shelter and
you're not sick sick and hopefully none
of your family and loved ones is sick,
okay, the only way you can get yourself
to be unhappy is to say, "I don't like
this. I want life to be different."
Right? And that's not going to change
life. Interestingly, that thought,
right? But it's going to change you and
make you miserable. It's the only way
you can make yourself unhappy.
You just lost another 8% of our
listeners.
Yeah.
Um, you have a Yeah. Hopefully we'll get
8% more somewhere else. You have a
tattoo on your back.
I don't.
Oh, you don't? Oh, Alli did. Was it Ali
about um Oh, yeah. The gravity of the
battle.
Gravity of the battle.
Could you Could you Could you explain
that to me? I found that really amazing.
Amazing. It's the last thing he told me.
Can you believe that? So Ali um Ali uh
had a tattoo on his back that read the
gravity of the battle means nothing to
those at peace. Okay. And you would
wonder why why because he's he you know
he he lived a life of ease and luxury in
general. I mean, even though he always
forced himself to go to the I mean, he
had those journeys where he would go and
literally uh walk across the villages of
America with no money just to live the
life of the people, the real people if
you want. He would go to, you know, it
was very unusual. Anyway, uh yeah, his
his tattoo said the gravity of the
battle means nothing to those at peace.
And it was the very last thing he told
me because basically he had he was
wearing those scrubs and you know how
the scrubs are open at the back and he
was lying on on the operating table and
then they were fixing something so he he
had to sit up and I could read the the
the tattoo was the very last thing he
told me before he went into the
operating room. And yeah, it's quite
interesting when you really think about
it. Of course, life is full of battles.
Life is not supposed to be easy. Just
understand that. Huh? Think of life as a
video game. If it was easy, it would be
boring like hell and you would learn
nothing at all. Okay? Life is supposed
to have a few difficulties on the way.
But that but but some battlesh
are are much harder for you than they
are for me. And many battles don't even
shake those who are at peace. Right? And
and and the question is how do you find
that peace? How do you find that feeling
of it's okay, it's just another battle?
It's just, you know, I've I've won every
other battle so far and the ones that
I've lost were the best thing that ever
happened to me. How can you get that
straight in your mind? Because then
suddenly when the when the next battle
approaches and I promise you there will
be a next battle approaching, okay, you
take that battle with complete
peacefulness. You basically treat it as
one more twist on the game controller
where you can actually affect your life
and make it better and then wait for the
next one and then another twist on the
game controller and you can do better.
It's a very stoic approach to life. But
it's so spot on when you think about it.
I was reading something you said which
really did make me pause for a second
and it said that, you know, correct me
if I'm wrong because I don't want to
mischaracterize what you said, but you
were saying how basically nobody regrets
their battles.
Like basically nobody would reverse
history and undo the hard thing they
went through. And I I sat and reflected
and I thought I thought about all my
guests that come here and sit in that
chair and all the the things they've
told me about and I thought I think
you're probably right.1%.
So I I I ran an experiment. So, uh, in
in the in the chapter about control, uh,
I, uh, I wrote, uh, something that I
call the eraser test. The eraser test is
a thought experiment. At Google X, we've
developed something that can pinpoint a
memory in your life and go back to that
event and erase that event from your
timeline. Okay? Not the memory of it,
the actual event. It will erase the
whole thing. And I ran that experiment
uh with uh maybe 12,000 people uh where
I basically tell them first write down
an event that's traumatic in your life.
Second, make a choice. Do you want me to
erase it or not? Third, be aware that if
you erase it, you're going to erase
everything that happened as a result.
Every friend that you met as a result,
every learning that you had as a result,
every resilience that you developed as a
result, would you still erase it?
99.99%
of people said, "No, I'd keep it." Okay?
And these were very traumatic events.
It's not just some bully at school. Huh?
So, you know, I will tell you openly
myself. I I cried on stage in 2019
because someone asked me and said, "Now
that you have the eraser test, would you
erase the death of Ali?"
And I wouldn't. I wouldn't because I
will tell you openly if you know my son
if I had told Ali before he died that
his death would make 51 million people
happy you would have said kill me right
now
and
I don't know I mean
is it radical acceptance or am I is my
brain telling me this but most of the
time most of the time the person that
you are is the result of those moments
it's not the result of the easy parts
M
and you would never erase it. 99.99%
of the people would not erase it.
Easier said in hindsight, I guess.
Of course.
But then, but then but then let's let's
extrapolate. If I would not erase 99.99%
of the harsh events in my past, why am I
thinking that this one is the one that's
going to stick?
Think about it. If all of your past
harsh experiences were painful then but
enormously important now, then maybe
this one too will be enormously
important. Maybe this is the one that's
going to make you who you are. reminds
me actually of something you said about
death as well because much of the reason
I think again correct me if I'm
mischaracterizing but um you said that
people fear death because of the
uncertainty it brings and not knowing
what that you know the life after death
or that you know that will look and feel
like and I I I reflect on what we're
talking about with this eraser and so I
think a lot of the reason why I might
not choose to erase traumatic events in
my life or the worst things that
happened to me is because then I don't
know which way that kind of my life
would have gone then and it could have
gone in a worse direction. So, in this
current moment, I feel somewhat content.
Uh, you know, I'm just I'm being I'm
talking about the potential with those
99% of people that you described.
And there's a chance it could be worse
if I use that eraser. So, I'm not going
to use that eraser because
Correct.
Yeah.
Yeah. Correct. And and and most of the
time, yes. When you look back in
hindsight, you start to recognize all of
the benefits that came with the trauma.
And most of the time, interestingly, the
way the physics of life work is that the
benefits outweigh the trauma.
Interesting.
Quick one. I talk to you guys about Hule
a lot. So, I'm going to do a quick
intermission to tell you about a bit of
a change that's happened in the last 2
months in my life. As you guys know, my
favorite Hule product historically has
been the Ready to Drink, which is these
bottles here. They are nutritionally
complete. However, recently since Hule
introduced the Hule protein, this now
plays a huge role in my diet. The salted
caramel flavor protein from Pule, which
is only 105 calories and has 26 vitamins
and minerals and 20 grams of protein,
um, serves two roles in my life. Now,
first thing I do when I wake up in the
morning is I have a glass. And then at
night time after I've been to the gym,
straight after the gym, I have a glass.
It tastes amazing. If you're going to
try it, follow my instructions here. Get
a couple of cubes of ice, put it in a
blender, put on the salted caramel
protein, and it tastes like a delicious
smoothie. I've already gone through one
tub of this. I'm actually on my second
tub, and I've got two more tubs to go
before I'm going to reorder more. But
genuinely, the salted caramel flavor,
maybe because I have a liking for salted
caramel for me, has been a game changer.
I wrote a book called Happy Sexy
Millionaire.
Nice. because it was because I was I was
an 18-year-old kid that um wrong because
of all the insecurities from my
childhood being the only black kid in an
all white school. Parents were broke but
everyone else around me was rich. So it
creates this cauldron of like insecurity
where you want to be you want to fit in
and then you it leads you to the the
path of thinking that money and material
possessions will be the thing that makes
me fit in. So I go off on the path to
try and be this happy sexy millionaire.
Of course 25 years old
Range Rover Sports sat outside. I'm a
multi-millionaire big successful
business six-pack all these things. the
day our company IPOs, it's worth 300
million and just this total anti-limax
which almost sent me into like and I'm
like where is the marching band and the
confetti like where is it? I 18-year-old
Steve promised me that and I and and so
now I reflect I look forward and think
well I need to be careful about some of
these ambitions I have because I don't
know whether that's the insecurity
defining the path or if it's my sort of
intrinsic these are intrinsic things
that will make me feel content. So my
question is about how do I know if my
ambitions how do I reframe them now to
make sure that they are leading me to a
happy place or a fulfilled place and not
just scratching some unscratchable
insecurity?
That's so interesting. Did did the did
the sexy girlfriend uh make you happy or
make you miserable?
Miserable. the the sexy one did made me
miserable, but the the one that wasn't
so wasn't didn't care about being sexy
and cared about other things, you know,
had those good values made me much
happier.
Did did the Range Rover break down
anytime and annoy?
Yeah, a couple of times it got smashed
up. People broke into it all the time
and there it cost a lot of money and
hard to park.
So I I I think we need to differentiate
between two sides. One one is ambition
and the other is expectation. Okay. So
have any ambition you want. Any ambition
you want. Hopefully a good ambition. Be
a good a good billionaire. Okay. So my
dream is that by the end of my life I
will have lost all of the money I made.
I'm not taking it to the grave anyway.
And made a billion people happy. That's
a very very interesting definition of
wealth. Okay. Have one of those or have
any definition you want. Any ambition
you want. But have the right
expectations. There is a difference
between ambition and expectations.
Ambition is what gets us to thrive and
strive in life and go further and have
an impact. Great. Set as many of those
as you want. When we achieved 10 million
happy, we set a billion happy. Okay? But
don't get me wrong, it took Jesus 2,000
years to get to a billion people. I'm
not going to get there. Let's just be
very clear. The expectation is clear. My
expectation is the my best dream is that
I will energize enough people to take
the mission forward. Okay? And that's my
expectation. So you know what my
expectation is today? My ambition is a
billion happy. My expectation is that
those listening to us are happy. Okay?
And if that fails that you are happy.
That's good enough. That's an amazing
day. Right? And once you set your
expectations right, nothing can dent
your unhappiness.
Don't don't get me wrong. I wake up
every morning and I go like what are we
going to do today? Can we reach, you
know, 100,000 people today? Is there a
piece of content we can develop? Can we
do this? Can we can I write another
book? I don't know. And I'm constantly
engaged. That's my ambition.
There are days where I wake up and
nothing happens. Great. Yeah, that
exists part of life. When you
differentiate those two, everything
becomes okay. Now,
I would also say when you're setting
your ambitions, avoid junk food. Okay?
Avoid the stuff that was promised to you
to make you happy before and failed to
make you happy then.
Okay? I I know that because I had 16
cars in my garage. The reason I had 16
cars in my garage was because I thought
the first one would make me happy and it
didn't. So, I told myself it's the
color. I should have taken another
color, right? So, I bought another one.
Oh, it's the model. Okay. And then I was
like, "No, but I don't have a fast car.
Maybe I need a fast car will make me
happy." No, a vintage car will make me
happy. And you know what happens? Every
time the the the promise is missed, you
go like, "Ah, no, no, hold on. Maybe
more or different is going to make me
happy." Wake up. You're a smart person.
Those things don't make you happy. Okay.
The and just measure. look back in your
life and find the actual moments that
made you happy. You know, I I have a
practice that I call the happy list. And
on the happy list, I say, write down as
many answers as you can to the statement
that starts with, I feel happy when.
Okay? Nobody ever wrote, I feel happy
when I buy a Ferrari. Okay? Yeah, you
get that for a couple of moments. Nobody
says, I feel happy when I win the Nobel
Prize. People say, I feel happy when my
daughter smiles. I feel happy when I
have a good cup of coffee. I feel happy
when I have a connected conversation
when I learn something new. All of them
accessible. All of them that things that
you can introduce in your life today or
this week at most. Okay. And yet we
don't do any of them because we want to
buy the Ferrari.
Made me miserable. I swear to you. I
think Ferrari is going to sue me. It was
It made me miserable. Okay. It always
broke down. It was so noisy. It was so
noisy and it didn't meet my character.
I'm a simple guy. I don't want to be
looked at in the streets, right? And it
made me miserable. And yet, I tried. And
you know what's the funny thing? The
funniest thing is that I swear to you, I
would take one of those cars out and 2
minutes into the drive, I wouldn't
remember which one it is. Because when
you're driving, what are you looking at?
The road. Okay? Especially when it was
dark and at night, you just don't see
the car anymore. It's like the
something's taking you somewhere, right?
And yet, I keep trying. It's so stupid.
Gratitude.
Oh yes.
The theme that came to mind when you
were speaking then because some people
think and I was definitely one of those
that the way to get have more in your
life is to go and buy more. But in fact
it's that it came to and this is one of
the conclusive points in my book was
that you can create so much more with
gratitude from what you already have.
$4 t-shirts.
Absolutely love them. make my life so
easy. I don't really have to iron them.
I don't have to, you know, worry about
when I go on a date, the first thing I
say is that this you're going to see
every time. I hope you're going to find
other qualities in me. Okay? And it's
very open. And if she doesn't like that
and she wants the Armani suit, she's not
for me. It's very good. Okay? Now the
game is this h gratitude is the ultimate
uh solution to the happiness equation
because it doesn't only remind you that
the event is meeting expectation. It
tells you that the event is so much
better than expectation that you're
grateful for it. Okay? And it does
something else that's amazing. It's
neuroplasticity at its best. It
basically tells you, okay, brain, I know
you're grumpy. I know you want to tell
me the seven thing that went things that
went wrong today, but your task right
now is to go and find the thing that
you're grateful for. Something that went
so well that you're happy with it. Go
brain, do your work. And if you do that
every day, hopefully several times a
day, suddenly your brain goes like, "Oh,
when I was searching for that thing you
asked me, you know, that I was grateful
for, I found three other things I'm
grateful for because I'm getting really
good at it and because life is full of
blessings, right? It is the absolute
answer and and you know what's the most
interesting part of gratitude
part of my my of soul for happy I talk
about a concept I call look down okay
and look down is the idea that if I
compare to the guy that had 17 cars I'd
feel miserable okay if a if a model
compares to the supermodel she would
feel miserable okay if you compare to
the guy in Africa or the guy in India or
the guy in Afghanistan or the refugee
camp, you would actually suddenly
realize, "Oh my god, I'm so blessed."
One of the most interesting statistics
is the Nordic countries, they measure
something called subjective well-being.
Subjective well-being basically is the
quality of your life. They have the
highest subjective well-being on the
planet. And yet, they have some of the
highest suicide rates.
Why? Because as the quality of our life
increases, we keep looking up. We keep
raising our expectations. It's like we
have a service level agreement with
life. Okay. Now that the government can
give me, you know, health care and
pension and so on, then maybe my
girlfriend shouldn't annoy me either,
right? Where do you get that from? Show
me their contract. Right? And if and and
suddenly it's just constantly resetting.
If you look down, if you look down, I
promise you it's going to take you a
very long time to get to the bottom.
There are so many people in the world
that are so much less fortunate than you
are. And it's almost arrogant and so
sorry to say stupid to not recognize
that. Okay. To to not if if you live in
the UK by definition, you're one of the
luckiest 10% alive. It's as simple as
that. Okay? At least most the majority
of the people in the UK. And by the way,
if you're listening to Stephen, then I
can guarantee you you are.
It's so true. I you know what? It's it I
I've never really So I thought grat this
idea of practicing gratitude was kind of
some like fluffy
airy fairy thing and then over the last
I'd say 3 years when I really I
reflected on the moments when I'm just
alone and I get overwhelmed to the point
where it's like slightly emotional
usually sometimes by music or whatever
it might be. I can genuinely make myself
overwhelmed to almost the point of tears
with gratitude.
Absolutely.
And I did it last night. I was in my
bedroom and I was walking through and I
just I and I I posted on my Instagram. I
think I posted blessed, grateful, and
enough. Just the three words because I
have that sometimes this overwhelming
feeling of like
Yeah. And I
So lucky.
Yeah. And it's so
And you know what? That is a choice.
That was a choice to have those thoughts
to have those thoughts about like
enough. I have everything I need. And
and to be quite honest, way more. And to
be fair, I always have
before the money. I've always been
enough. You know, and it was society
used attempt to convince me that I
wasn't
$4 t-shirts. How many of those can I
buy? You think about it. And yet some of
us waste an entire lifetime
trying to get more Armani suits. Why?
Because because of the matrix, whatever
they call it, you know.
So you're smart. You're so smart to be
able to make the money to make to to buy
the Armani suit. And yet you're still a
sucker for the people that are for the
eyes of the people that are going to
think of you as more than you are
because you're wearing it.
Seriously, I mean, if it pleases you. By
the way, nothing wrong with being
fashionable and beautiful and taking
care of yourself. Absolutely. But if
you're doing it for the ego,
what does that what does that say about
you? You're so freaking successful and
you're still, you know, expecting that
people will value you more because
you're wearing a suit.
I don't know. There's something you said
as well on that in that exact point, but
also on your previous point about going
on these dates and saying to the the
young person or, you know, the the
lovely person you're on the date with,
um, listen, this is a $4 t-shirt and I'm
going to wear it a lot. So, if you don't
like that,
I wear 10 of them. It's not the same
t-shirt. I have 10 of them at any point
in time. Yes.
Don't don't spoil my reputation here.
I was going to say, well, you know, it
looks very similar to the one you're
wearing.
Three there three pairs of jeans and 10
uh 10 black t-shirts. You said there you
said um if she'sn't okay with that then
in fact she's actually not the person
for you
and she and actually trying to forge a
relationship that is on that basis would
probably lead you to
a not so good place because your life
would become a hamster wheel of valuing
that.
Yeah.
So conditional love I you talk about
this concept of conditional love and I
don't necessarily know what you
you mean because I didn't get the full
definition but what is conditional love
and what's the danger of
conditional love is I love you because
we're having this conversation it's
going to go to tens of thousands of
people. Thank you.
Okay. And yeah, but but but that
actually ends if it doesn't go to 10
thou to tens of thousands of people. You
know, I love her because she's cute and
she makes me laugh. Unconditional love
is real love. Okay. Unconditional is I
love my son. He pissed me off when he
was young. I loved him. He taught me
when I was young. I loved him. Uh you
know, he left me and caused me pain when
he left. I mean, it's not his choice,
but you know, and I still love him. He's
not even part of this world, and I love
him. There are no conditions for my
love. There is there are no conditions
for my love for butterflies. Okay, I
love butterflies even though there are
none in this room. None of them is
entertaining me. Uh you know, I just
love butterflies. It's a it's it's just
a feeling that I don't understand. I
can't explain with an equation and it's
always there. Okay? And it's the only
kind of love the only kind of love that
makes us happy. Understand that all of
the other kinds of love are anchored in
conditions. Anchored in what? in
expectations.
Okay? And anything you anchor in
expectations
sooner or later is going to change. If
you if you love her because she's
beautiful, sooner or later she's going
to grow a little older and someone else
will be more beautiful. What are you
going to do then? Okay. If you if you
love him because he's your business
partner and making you a lot of money,
what are you going to do when things go
a little difficult? Okay. And and the
idea is when you go to unconditional
love, something amazing happens.
Suddenly you're in control because the
joy of unc unconditional love is to give
it. There are no conditions. You're not
expecting anything to you know
conditional love is is reciprocity. Hey,
I'm going to love you for this and in
return you're going to do this for me.
Okay? And and of course the other side
of it is the ego of love is like I'm
lovable. I'm you know I'm going to
create the conditions for you guys to
love me. So look, I'm lovable. I'm well
done, Mo. Right? You've you've created
something amazing. You should be proud
of yourself. None of that matters. All
of that gets you. Of course, romantic
love is wonderful. And you know, the
love of, you know, partners in business,
yeah, beautiful, wonderful, huh? If you
want to get to the core of unshakable
happiness that comes from your love,
learn to love beyond conditions. And if
you can learn to love beyond conditions,
promise you the world will love you back
without conditions. So the days when
you're not at your best, you're still
going to be loved.
Romantic love. Let's take a pivot there
then.
Oh man.
Before we started recording, we talked a
little bit about um the modern world of
dating and how difficult it is
um because of the way the world's
changed and you know the battles with
romantic love. You you know I know
you've been in you were in a
relationship for a long time.
Yeah. 28 years. Yes. And then back on
the dating market.
Yes. Not doing great.
Not doing great.
You were you were with someone for 20 28
years.
Yes.
I'm like 28 years old. I know. That's
staggering, you know.
Oh, she's an amazing woman. And we're
still best friends. She's still she's
still in my eyes the best woman that
ever existed. And I think in my in her
eyes, I'm still I'm the best man that
ever existed. And I think it's a
beautiful beautiful connection. Uh, and
it's doable and it's actually if anyone
needs to experience that once in their
life.
Do you know what question I'm gonna ask
you?
No. Um, if if you both think you're the
best people that have ever ever existed,
huh? Love and relationships are two
different things.
Love is a feeling. Uh, relationships are
uh compatibility and fit and work. Okay?
and progress and projects and uh you
know and partnerships and lots of and
lots of things relationships. So, in in
the book I'm working on, uh, I actually
have a section about finding love and
and a section about keeping love, right?
Because because they're not the same
thing. And I, you know, Nebel and I, you
know, she's the most amazing woman ever.
And, you know, at least from what she
gave me in life, I I will eternally be
grateful. Everything that I am, any
comment that I said today was discussed
one day with Nebel, right? her
spirituality, her wisdom, her, you know,
her love. It made me who I am. Okay? And
you can't kill that because you no
longer want to sleep together. Do do you
understand this? You can't you can't be
that stupid to take all of those
beautiful relationships and just say,
"Okay, that's it. We're separated. We
don't want to talk." Right? The the the
thing is uh I believe that love uh is
short-lived. Okay? I believe that Nebel
and I had to fall in love six times uh
uh over over the 28 years because we
both changed every single time. So she's
she was my college sweetheart. We had
that amazing, you know, puppy love and
wonderful romantic relationship and so
on and then we get married and then she
becomes a different person and I become
a different person and you suddenly go
like where's my sweetheart? Okay. And
you have a choice then either to walk
out and say I'm look I'm going to go
look for my sweetheart or in our case we
go like oh my god she's gone that
sweetheart but my god this one is so
cute I love that one right and we fell
in love again and again and again six
times until
our paths went literally opposite ways
after rally uh where my my path went
into okay I'm going to write a book and
tour the world and do more of what I do
and her path went into okay it's time
for me to start focusing on my own life
I want to you know focus on my own
business focus on my own stability I
don't want to travel the world like a
maniac and it became difficult it became
difficult to go back every two weeks
when we haven't met and feel guilty that
I have not been there for her and she
hasn't been there for me and so one day
we sat down we spoke we hugged literally
hugged and then you know said okay maybe
it's time to try another experience and
and then We went back to the same home
and spent another week together and then
I left. Uh and it's beautiful. It's
beautiful as it is. I think uh you know
uh we we still carry each other's
credits cards and we still you know
manage our investments together and
there is total trust and total uh you
know understanding and we still you know
parent a daughter together and it's
wonderful. Uh it's just that romance is
a is one part of the different melody of
loves that you can feel for someone.
Such a beautiful level of maturity and I
guess love. Yeah.
Yeah. Of course. And you should meet
her. I think uh it becomes easier if you
understand how she is.
So pandemics. Let's talk pandemics.
From rough to pandemics.
Yeah. Yeah, I mean this is exactly what
I felt when I was reading about your
your stories. Such a diverse range of
topics that in so many beautiful ways
intertwine and are influenced by each
other. Um I read that you in a recent
sort of news article that had just come
out I think in the last couple of weeks
that you you you feel that we're
currently engaged in a productivity
pandemic.
Well engaged in many pandemics. Uh the
the truth is that we uh are focusing on
the silly ones. Uh
what is the real one?
The real one is artificial intelligence.
No doubt.
Why?
Because it's here to stay and evolve and
become bigger and bigger and bigger and
influential in ways that we have not
even started to consider yet. Co is here
to come and go.
For someone that doesn't know what
artificial intelligence is, which is a
lot of people,
yeah,
probably more than 95% of the listeners
of this this podcast.
What is artificial intelligence?
Great question. So, so the reason for
scary smart my book is entirely around
that that there are so many people out
there that have no clue that have they
have interacted today whatever time of
the day it is for you what wherever you
are whatever you do in life you've
already interacted with 10 to 12 15 20
maybe 50 artificial intelligences that
are all smarter than you that's the
truth of our life artificial
intelligence there was a turning point
in the history of technology where uh
before which All technology was
programmable. So it became it was simply
a tool that extended the capability of
humanity. Okay? You take you can't
hammer a nail with your hand. You use a
hammer, you know, you you can hammer a
nail with the with the hammer and then
and the hammer will do exactly what you
tell it to do. Okay? Uh beyond the turn
of the century, we've discovered
something that's called deep learning.
And deep learning allows machines to
learn on their own. We don't understand
how they learn.
The developers that write the code don't
even understand how they learn, but they
develop intelligence. They become able
uh to make uh autonomous decisions based
on intelligent observations and in you
know um a sense of their environment and
the sense of the conditions that
surround them and they make those
decisions on every specific task we've
given them better than humans.
Something you said scared me before we
started recording which was that you
know you're a very smart guy, right? and
your your professional experience
especially working at a company like
Google which is known for its um
artificial intelligence capabilities. um
for you to say to me that you've
basically given up your summer to go
around the world um talking about your
new book Scary Smart and the
implications of artificial intelligence
and you're you're basically choosing to
you know because you understand the the
importance of time and you could be
doing anything for you to consider this
the important work of your life in this
period um begs the question why is it so
important? Why are you giving up so much
to spread this message? It it is the
single most important message on our
planet today. I don't think people
realize. So AI today is better than
humanity in everything it does. Okay? By
the year 2029, the smartest being on
planet Earth is going to be a machine.
Now, I just I don't want to we can go
into the details, huh? But I want you to
imagine a scenario on on planet Earth
where we're not the humans but the apes.
Okay? where there is another being that
looks at us as the apes. Okay? And that
being is going to be smarter than us.
You heard me correctly in 8 years time.
8 years time.
8 years time. And we're not talking
about it, Stephen. What's going wrong
with humanity? We're not talking about
it. Okay. Well, if you if you look at AI
from the inside, you realize that
through the law of accelerating returns,
Ray Corwell basically predicts that by
the year 2045, it's in your lifetime and
mine, AI is going to be a billion times
smarter than humans. 1 billion times
smarter. You know what that means? This
is comparable to the intelligence of
Einstein as compared to a fly. Okay? And
humanity while we're still Einstein is
not discussing how are we going to keep
the best interest of us the fly in
Einstein's mind. Okay. We're we're
talking through the arrogance of
humanity about how we're going to
control them, how we're going to box
them, how we're going to tripwire them.
Good luck with that. The biggest hacker
in the room, the smartest hacker in the
room will always find a way through our
defenses. Okay. Now, Scary Smart is
written in a very unusual way because
it's not a book about artificial
intelligence only. It's a it's a book
about the role of humanity in the age of
the machines. Okay? And it's split into
two parts. The first part is the scary
part. And if you and I dive into this, I
promise you, you're going to be scared.
The second part of it is I what I call
the smart part. So, five chapters are
scary like hell. Most of my early
readers would call me after five
chapters and say, "Should I commit
suicide?" Right? and and then the other
five chapters are a story of hope.
Basically, it's entirely within our
hands to do something so quickly, so
simply that can save our world. Okay.
Now, the difference between those two is
a question of awareness that people are
preoccupied talking about COVID and what
the prime minister decided and the next
profitability uh uh quarter uh on our
business and people are not talking
about the existential challenge that we
have ahead of us. Okay, which is
imminent 8 years and 2045. So I start
the book with a thought experiment. I
say you and I are sitting in front of a
campfire in the middle of nowhere in
2055. Okay? I'm going to tell you the
story of what happened between 2021 and
2055 from that perspective. Okay? But
I'm not going to tell you why we're
sitting in front of the campfire. Why
are we hiding in the middle of nowhere?
Is it because we're hiding from the
machines? Or is it because the machines
have built a utopia that allows us to
enjoy nature and connection and the
luxuries of life? Right? And the
difference between them is really
straightforward. The difference between
them is what you and I and everyone
listening, not the developers, not the
government, okay? Not the uh uh the the
regulators, what you and I and everyone
listening are going to teach those
machines because those machines don't
learn from their developers the minute
they're out there. They learn from your
swipes on Instagram. They learn from
your retweets. They learn from your
fights, your arguments, from this
conversation. And if we don't shape up
as humanity, at least some of us, enough
of us, those machines will magnify the
essence of what we are today as humans.
And that's not really pretty.
Are you optimistic about this?
I am 100% optimistic. Okay. And it's a
great question to start with. Um, I
believe eventually eventually we're
going to end up in a utopia. Whichever
way, now let me explain. We humans have
been able to create this amazing setup
that you and I are sitting in to record
and communicate with the world because
of our intelligence. But we've also
destroyed the planet because of our
limited intelligence. So, you know, we
found a way to create a supply chain
that can supply Mo with a slice of
watermelon right around the corner in,
you know, in in a supermarket because
we're intelligent, but we could not be
intelligent enough to not use single-use
plastic. We created mobility because
we're intelligent, but we could not be
intelligent enough to stop burning fuel
to kill the planet. Right? It's our
limited intelligence that is the
hindrance of humanity. And AI is
surpassing our limited intelligence very
quickly to the point that it will get to
the ultimate form of intelligence. And
what's the ultimate form of
intelligence? The ultimate form of
intelligence is the intelligence of life
itself. It's an it's the intelligence of
abundance where AI would see no reason
to crush the fly.
You know how life is. Life would say
more flies, more uh you know uh uh
antelope, more tigers, more poop, more
everything. Let's just, you know, let's
have more of everything and everything
will thrive. This is where AI will will
will get 100%. I have no doubt about
that. The challenge is the journey from
here to there. Do we want that journey
to be smooth and straightforward and
wonderful or do we want to hit bumps on
the way? And if we don't want to hit
those bumps on the way, it's not about
their intelligence.
It's about their ethics. It's about the
ethics of the machines. And that's a
very very important conversations.
They're no longer machines. they will
develop a code of ethics. They are
independent. They're sentient in every
possible way. And you know, and this is
truly the core of of of scary smart is
an expl explanation that we're no longer
building computers. This is not the
programmable technology of the pre, you
know, turn of the century. This is
autonomous.
It is independent.
It is intelligent. It evolves. It
procreates.
Well, that's terrifying.
It is terrifying. And we're not talking
about it.
For anyone that doesn't know what
procreates mean, basically give creates
more of itself. I guess
it it replicates.
We we humans, we take a 9 month cycle,
if we find the the the right person and
we're, you know, we're in the mood.
They take micros secondsonds to create
700 million copies of themselves if they
wanted to.
Can I ask a really specific question?
Because whenever we go into this
conversation around machine learning and
AI, people think of it as robots sort of
like marching down the streets with guns
because we've seen that's the image
we've had portrayed to us in movies like
Terminator and
that's not that's never going to happen.
Okay. So what what what is what is the
realistic practical threat?
So so let's just take that moment that
point for a minute. Huh. One of the most
interesting part of of AI being sentient
is that it has agency. Okay. And that
agency is is is is available through
robotics whether that's a humanoid work
walking down the streets and there are
many killing robots being created as we
speak okay in the US army and in the you
know in the Chinese army and so on but
that's not the challenge there the
agency they have is over your mind and
that's what most people don't understand
let let me give you a simple example I
uh yeah my daughter loves cats so when I
swipe on Instagram reels I look for
cats, send her as many as I can, good
ones, and then when she sends me back a
smile, my life is made. Right through
that process, one time I realized that
one of the types of reels on Instagram
is people playing rock solos. I'm a
junkie for rock solos. And so I clicked
on the first one. It was a very talented
young woman uh holding a serious metal
guitar and playing some Metallica
something or whatever. I was like, "Man,
that's amazing." and I clicked like then
in Instagram recommendation engine said
okay I can capture this one seems to
like this let me show him more so two
pages later I started to see other rock
music solos being played by men they
played songs I didn't like so I swiped
away the next morning my entire feed was
filled with women playing rock music
because in Instagram thought I didn't
like the men, I like the women, not that
I didn't like the songs and I liked that
song. Now, if you think of that simply
without knowledge of the real world, you
would think that rock music is dominated
by women guitarists. And the truth of
the world is no. Rock music in its, you
know, in its generation was completely
dominated by male guitarists. Now, it's
not it's not for male or females. It's
just that your your view of the world is
entirely skewed by a machine. Okay? And
that view of the world can go into any
ideology, can teach you anything that it
wants or that it believes it you want
based on machine intelligence. That kind
of agency can change societies.
Okay? And we're handing over that
control entirely to the machines.
There's no employee at at at Facebook
that gets consulted uh should I show
more more female guitarists. Okay? It's
entirely in the hands of the machines.
And of course, you know, if you've ever
seen the movie Idiocracy, what is
happening is that the machine is
populating more and more idiocracy. The
machine is getting people who are
clicking on stupid stuff to see more of
the stupid stuff so that their view of
the world is more stupid. Now, that kind
of agency is massive. Now, let's go back
to robots and and and and and machines
and so on.
A self-driving car is a kind of robot,
okay? It just doesn't look like a
humanoid.
A a um um a flying drone, a delivery
drone is a kind of robot. A um uh um an
autopilot that lands a a 747 is a kind
of robot. And and all of those are now
going to be controlled by machines.
Defense AR arsenals are going to be
controlled by machines. And you know the
trigger that that that you know launches
a rocket is a kind of robot. Now the the
the challenge we have as humanity is
this
AI uh is never going to get to the point
where of what we saw in um in Robocop or
iRoot or whatever because we will not
live long enough to get there if the
intention of AI against is against us.
Okay. The kinds of chapter four of the
book is called a mild dystopia. Okay.
And in the mild dystopia, I speak about
realistic scenarios that are
horrifically scary. And if you've ever
watched horror movies, if you remember
Halloween when I was a child was the
most hor, you know, horrifying because
Halloween could actually happen. H uh
the the the kinds of scenarios are
simple. They are machine versus machine.
We've seen that in, you know, in the in
Black Monday when machine trading,
machines trading versus each other would
collapse the market by 22.6%. 6% when
the m when the humans would take hours
until they can actually intervene. H
machines versus machines is happening
all the time. Mark most of the market
now is traded by machines. H of course
you can imagine that this will happen
more and more. So if imagine if one of
the superpowers in the world puts its
nuclear arsenal under the control of an
an AI because it's quicker to take
action then the other side will probably
do the same and then suddenly we've
handed all the nuclear weapons to
machines. Okay. These possibilities are
are absolutely going to happen.
Possibility of machines siding with the
wrong guy. Just like you can use AI to
you know find solutions for for for
climate change. You can also use it to
develop advanced viruses. Okay. And and
probably you know identity theft or you
know breaking through bank statements
and so on. So the same kind of
technology can actually develop patterns
that can take us to that direction. Mhm.
Take uh machines not understanding what
we mean like like like Instagram didn't
understand that I was interested in
Metallica not in just you know lady
rockers okay they didn't understand can
we blame them for that but it's a very
realistic scenario now imagine if we
told human you know the machines uh okay
we want to be happier what would
machines do pump us up with dopamine
uh they didn't understand we didn't tell
we we're not very good at explaining
what we want and then there are there
are bugs simple mistakes and there has
been quite a few examples of those so
far in AI where there is a bug in the
system and the bug in the system leads
to a mistake okay those scenarios are a
lot more realistic and there are around
the corner and we're not talking about
it
even though that was a short monologue
I'm now totally convinced
we have to wake up it is real
I'm going to make sure I uh finish your
book entire And I would really implore
everybody to read your book because I
know that the way that you see the
world, the perspective you come from and
especially the fact that this book isn't
one that's about explaining the
technology itself. It's about the real
near-term implications of the technology
that we, you know, will impact all of
our lives in considerable ways and are
at the moment. Um, I really consider it
to be one of the most important books of
our time. Um,
Oh, thank you.
And I I have to say to to really
conclude on that point, what is
therefore is the answer? The answer is
very straightforward and and it's very
shocking if you think about
straightforward. I like
Yeah. Yeah. I mean the the the truth of
artificial intelligence is the key
answer is found in the concept that they
are no longer machines. Okay. You have
to internalize the idea that these are
sentient beings. And the difference is
if you're dealing with a machine, what
you normally do to safeguard yourself is
to create restrictions. you you chain it
to a wall or you you have a safety uh
you know uh red button or whatever.
Okay,
unplug it.
Yeah. If you're dealing with sentient
beings,
sentient beings don't make decisions
based on intelligence. Sentient beings
make decisions based on ethics as
informed by intelligence. So, so you
know, simply when you really think about
it,
which is again one of my favorite
chapters in the book is a chapter that
basically speaks about I call it raising
our future that speaks basically speaks
about the fact that those those machines
are going to be conscious. They're
actually going to be more conscious than
humans. Okay? Uh they're going to be
emotional. They'll have a much wider
breadth of emotions than we do. Just
like you have more emotions than a
jellyfish. If you extrapolate that, you
know, the more intelligent we become,
the more able we are to analyze things
and accordingly the more emotions that
we can, you know, feel as a result. And
the third and most important is that
they will actually develop morals and a
code of ethics. So they will have a a
view of the world through which they
decide what they should do. Okay? to
ponder what that kind of ethical code
should be when there are digital beings
and biological beings and the
interaction between them and their
perception of time and their perception
of you know uh uh of objectives and
targets and so on. It suddenly becomes
quite intriguing when you and we're not
talking about it. Okay, we're not
talking about any of this. The so so the
game is this. The game is if they're
going to make their decisions as
sentient beings based on ethics, how do
you raise a sentient being that is
ethical like you raise a child? The
answer for me is that we, you and I,
swiping on Instagram and tweeting, we
need to find ways to show the machine
that humanity is not represented by the
scum of humanity, but is represented
represented by the top of humanity. And
most people when I tell them this, they
go like, "Oh man, we're in trouble.
Humanity sucks." No, humanity does not
suck. I apologize. Humanity is an
amazing amazing amazing being when it's
defined by its top. If you've ever fell
in love, if you've ever, you know,
listened to music, if you've ever
observed a work of art, this is divine.
We're an amazing species. The worst of
us is scum. The best of us is amazing.
Okay. The problem is the best of us does
not show to the machines. The best
humans actually re resign. They go like,
"Yeah, let them swipe. Let the dog do
fight continue. I'm not interested in
any of this. It's time to show up. And
the and the best of you and I
individually
in in the past, humanity, every
individual tried to show the best of
them. Now we we show the worst of us. We
show narcissism. We we show toxic
positivity. We show, you know, we show
the worst of us. And that has to shift.
So my answer is very straightforward.
For the machines to become amazing
teenagers in 10 years time, we need to
become amazing parents today. And that's
truly the answer, the only answer I
could find. And I promise you, I'm Elon
Musk said that in his interview with Joe
Rogan, he said the threat of the
machines is comparable to the threat of
nuclear weapons. And I have lobbied, I
have tried to tell the world not to go
there, but it's going to happen. It's
inevitable. I call them the three
inevitables. The machines AI will
happen. It will be smarter than us.
Okay? And and and and some mistakes will
happen on the past. It will happen. But
we could influence it as good parents,
you and I and everyone. And it doesn't
have to be everyone, by the way. We need
1%. We need to instill doubt in the
minds of the machines that we are not
the worst of us, we are the best of us.
The example I always give is when Donald
Trump used to tweet, the first tweet is
Donald Trump. The second tweet is
insulting the president. The third tweet
is insulting the guy number one. And the
fourth tweet is insulting all of them.
The machines are creating patterns.
They're saying, "Okay, the second guy
doesn't like the president." And all of
humanity likes to insult each other.
Yeah.
Okay. Can we have seven tweets inserted
in there that are respectful?
Can we show the machines, instill doubt
in the minds of the machines so that
they look at the world and say, "Oh my
god, Hitler was horrible." But Hitler is
not all of humanity. As a matter of
fact, most of humanity resents that.
Most of humanity believes that this is
wrong. Mommy and daddy are good beings.
The only problem with this podcast is
that it has to come to an end at some
point. Honestly, honestly, just
absolutely mind blown. And you know, the
really remarkable thing about you is
you're able to explain very complex
ideas in relatable ways. So that whole
time I you didn't lose me once. It's
also because of your your great passion
on these subjects and you can tell
you're fighting battles that you know
you sincerely care about and I I just
hope that if we are to become better
parents with whatever help we need from
the big tech companies well I mean
you're saying that it's more of a
reflection of who we are. um that that
day in 2055 where we're set around that
campfire, it's because we've chosen to
go there for a meditation retreat as
opposed to escaping the sentient beings
that are controlling our lives. And um
that's a tremendously thoughtprovoking
thing to to I think to end on. Your book
Scary Smart is available now for
everybody everywhere.
Absolutely.
Amazon,
everywhere. uh your book, your bookshop,
your on online, on Amazon, on Audible,
on uh
all over the world as well.
All all of international English and uh
Dutch are are coming out at the same
time.
And I really really recommend anybody
that wants wants to um to understand,
but also to prepare themselves in an
optimistic way for what you've described
as the real pandemic of our time to to
go out and buy that book. There is just
one more thing I wanted to ask you
before we wrap. Um, and we only started
this last week. The last guest that sat
in the chair with you, I said to them at
the very end, I said, "Can you write a
question in this diary for my next
guest?" They didn't know who who it was
going to be, but they wrote a question
in the diary for you. So, I'm just going
to skip to that page. I've actually not
read the question.
That's such a great great practice.
Okay, here we go. So the question that
the previous guest wrote for you and
this is Jacqueline Gold who is the
long-standing CEO of Van Summers just
one of the most remarkable stories um
business stories I think she's the 14th
richest person women woman in the
country and she's gone through
tremendous adversity lost a child
battled with cancer against all the odds
stage four cancer sexual abuse and she
she talked about that last week the
question for you she wrote is what are
the failures you cherish the
I have failed for many many years to
empower my feminine side.
It's my biggest failure ever. Still is
my biggest weakness even though I've
done so much better in the last 5 and a
half years. Um
I think our world is suffering from
hyper masculinity.
And I say that with my weird deep voice,
but it's the truth. We've turned it into
a world of doing. We just go out there
and do stuff. Mostly the wrong stuff.
Mostly stuff that we don't need. Mostly
stuff that doesn't nourish anyone. Okay?
And it's because we've capitalized so
entirely in our modern world on skills
like analytical thinking, linear
thinking, strength, uh you know, uh um
um discipline, uh control, all of these
are masculine traits. Okay, masculine
and feminine is not man and woman.
Masculine and feminine is traits that
are correlated to the fe to the
masculine and correlated to the
feminine. All those masculine traits
when you overdo them they work against
you. You strength is good. You overdo it
you become aggressive. Linear thinking
is good. You overdo it you become
stubborn. And we've ignored the feminine
qualities that are lifegiving nurturing
in you know uh uh um uh intuitive
creative playful flowy. Okay. Beautiful.
All of these empathetic.
We've created a world that is so lacking
in all of those and I'm I'm to blame to
become a successful executive. I had to
empower empower the masculine side.
Until I realized that true leaders don't
do we be. And being is what the feminine
is about. Our humanity is on the wrong
side of being. We're not showing our
good sides. We're not able to nourish
life give care. We're not able to. And I
h had a I mean most of my my work is a
very
confusing
marriage between sometimes what is
physical and you know measurable and
concrete and mathematical and and what
is not physical. Sometimes I have to
ponder topics like death and
spirituality and so on. And one morning
I woke up five and a half years ago and
I heard my left brain tell me that's it.
That's as far as I can get you without
being able to connect to all of being to
to go outside that shell of me versus
the world which is the masculine. We're
not going to go anywhere further. If
there is anything that I have failed
miserably to do was was to do that early
enough. And if anything our world is
failing to do is to embrace that side.
Sadly, as we empower women today, we
force them to be become masculine. We
force them to become competitive. We
force them to become tough because the
way the game is played is that way. We
should empower the feminine. And and and
it's so funny when you really think
about it. Even someone like Steve Jobs
or Gandhi or who are men in their
biology, they succeeded because they
empowered their feminine. Steve Jobs
creativity or appreciation of beauty or
empathy for the user needs. That's what
made him Steve Jobs being obnoxious and
annoying. That's what took away from it
the masculine side. And it's about time
that the world wakes up to this. When we
raise the machines, by the way, going
back to scary smart, are we going to
raise them to be masculine geeks or are
we going to raise them to be lifegiving?
And I think really this is the biggest
failure ever for me and I think for all
of our society.
Oh [__] that was really powerful.
It's true.
And it's so true. And you know what I
was thinking that whole time. My my
girlfriend is in Bali at the moment
and she's been talking to me extensively
about being more in touch with the
feminine and what what they call you
know yin which is you know the
absolutely yin and yang energy. So, um,
it all rang very, very true. And I think
you really helped me make sense of all
that in a very again relatable,
understandable way. And I'm going to,
um, I'm going to ask you to carry on
this tradition by writing a question
into the diary which will be shown to my
next guest, but it will remain a secret
until then. Listen, I I can't thank you
enough. You know, um, sometimes I thank
people for the time. Um, I think I want
to thank you for um, the lessons that
you've taught me in this conversation
that will really make my life a lot
better. And you know the thing is as
well is I I sit here every week
imparting what I know. So long after you
walk out of this door because you've
left me with those lessons I'm going to
spend the rest of my life on this
podcast talking about them great
as I do and also talking about your
book. Right. So there's a couple of
guests that I encounter and I just spend
the next 10 years of my life just
battling on. So, but you're one of those
really, really profound people. And I
understand, we said this before we
started filming, but my manager Dom
Murray when he started on like the first
week of his job here and I he started
learning about the podcast, he said to
me, he said, "You got to get this guy
called Moan. He's a Google X." And I was
like, I don't, you know, just was I
hadn't heard the name.
You're the man. You're the man. I'm
grateful.
And he kept saying it and then and then
it wasn't just him. And this is where it
got really sort of reinforced. Other
people were coming on the podcast
telling um me that I had to get you on
over and over again. and you hear that
you hear this name three, four, five
times, you think, "Fucking hell, okay,
there's something that I need to, you
know, this definitely something I need
to do." And then, you know, someone in
our team said, "Oh, Mo's in London."
Yeah.
So, we we had to reach out. And I'm so
deeply grateful that you
grateful that you did. I am really
grateful for the time that you gave me
and the opportunity to share some of
what I am pondering. It must It's not
right, but it's really worth thinking
about with your audience.
Great thing you're doing for the world
by by sharing that. Honestly, I don't
say this I'm not I don't gas my guests
up like this, but it is really of
tremendous value. And you know, just I I
want to thank you from the bottom of my
heart. Thank you.
Thank you.
[Music]